incus: initial documentation (#423)
flatcar/flatcar-website: content/docs/latest/container-runtimes/incus.md

weight: 11
---

While Flatcar proposes Containerd and Docker by default, [Incus][incus] can be used to run containers. The goal of this guide is not to re-write the Incus documentation but to give key aspects of Incus usage on Flatcar.

# Installing Incus

Incus is provided as an [official][official-sysext] Systemd sysext Flatcar extension. To install it automatically at boot:
```yaml
---
# config.yaml
# butane < config.yaml > config.json
variant: flatcar
version: 1.1.0
storage:
  files:
    - path: /etc/flatcar/enabled-sysext.conf
      contents:
        inline: |
          incus
```

Once the instance booted, `incus` command is available and `incus.{socket,service}` are started. Note: the `core` user is added by default to the `incus-admin` group.
```bash
core@localhost ~ $ systemd-sysext status
HIERARCHY EXTENSIONS    SINCE
/opt      none          -
/usr      flatcar-incus Fri 2025-05-16 08:43:36 UTC
core@localhost ~ $ incus --version
6.0.3
core@localhost ~ $ userdbctl groups-of-user core
USER GROUP
core docker
core docker
core incus-admin
core portage
core systemd-journal
core systemd-journal
core wheel
core wheel

8 memberships listed.
```

# Initialize Incus

> Before starting to use Incus, one needs to initialize it. There are two possibilities:
> * using the CLI: useful for testing purposes
> * using a pre-seed file: useful for automation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before using Incus, it must be initialized. You can do this in one of two ways:
* Via CLI - Ideal for testing and quick setups.
* Using a pre-seed file - Recommended for automation and repeatable deployments.
```

      overwrite: true
systemd:
  units:
    - name: incus-admin-init.service
      enabled: true
      contents: |
        [Unit]
        Description=incus admin init
        After=systemd-sysext.service
        Requires=systemd-sysext.service
        [Service]
        StandardInput=file:/etc/incus/pre-seed.yaml
        Type=oneshot
        RemainAfterExit=yes
        ExecStart=/usr/bin/incus admin init --preseed
        [Install]
        WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

Incus will now use ZFS pool to store images and containers:

```bash
core@localhost ~ $ incus storage list
+---------+--------+----------------+---------+---------+
|  NAME   | DRIVER |  DESCRIPTION   | USED BY |  STATE  |
+---------+--------+----------------+---------+---------+
| default | zfs    | Incus ZFS pool | 1       | CREATED |
+---------+--------+----------------+---------+---------+
core@localhost ~ $ zpool list
NAME      SIZE  ALLOC   FREE  CKPOINT  EXPANDSZ   FRAG    CAP  DEDUP    HEALTH  ALTROOT
default  4.50G   592K  4.50G        -         -     1%     0%  1.00x    ONLINE  -
```

[incus]: https://linuxcontainers.org/incus/
[documentation]: https://linuxcontainers.org/incus/docs/main/

> [official-sysext]: https://www.flatcar.org/docs/latest/provisioning/sysext/#flatcar-release-extensions-official

Reviewer 2: Do we have a rule about links to other pages in the flatcar docs? Whether these ought to be absolute links like this one here, or maybe relative ones. Relative links would point to an updated page within stage sites, but I'm not sure if the final website preserves the directory structure for the relative links to be valid in github repo and in the website.
